---
layout: default
title: Chaos vs Clarity
---

## Chaos vs Clarity

In any workplace, the balance between Chaos and Clarity plays a crucial role in determining productivity. This post explores how these elements manifest in daily work and offers strategies to maximize Clarity.


During work, employees generate either Chaos or Clarity. Chaos is characterized by confusion and disorder, while Clarity represents understanding and order. Summing up these elements across the company gives us the organizational Chaos-Clarity balance. If an organization produces more Chaos than Clarity, it will head towards negative productivity.

In most companies, majority of the Chaos is generated by junior employees. To offset this, senior employees need to generate Clarity to ensure the company functions productively.

## Identifying Chaos vs. Clarity

The way to identify if an action generated Chaos or Clarity,

Chaos -> Gives a feeling of anxiousness, confusion. You can hear phrases like `I didn't get it`, `Feels off`, `Too many things`, `Not sure`, `Whats the next steps?`, `How do we do it?`, `Where do I start`.
Clarity -> Gives a feeling of harmony, excitement. You can hear phrases like `Wow`, `I'm excited`, `Let's do it`, `Go for it`, `Perfect`, `Looks good`.

## Examples

- Developer Example: A developer creates messy code, making it difficult for a senior to review.
- Designer Example: A designer submits 20 ideas randomly, requiring extensive time for review.
- Other Example: A colleague proposes many ideas without filtering, causing confusion and delays.

## Colonist

To foster a productive environment at Colonist.io, our goal is to create more Clarity than Chaos. By implementing effective [communication frameworks](https://demiculus.com/communication/), thoroughly reviewing submissions, and clarifying thoughts before communicating, we can ensure our team operates at its best. Every action we take can either contribute to Chaos or Clarity. We strive for Clarity in all our endeavors.